>> Will Sentance: We need our
function to be able to handle both.
And here it is, it's known as reduce,
it can handle a remarkable range of tasks.
We're gonna go through it.
I, because you know me,
I like to hold off on giving them
their fancy names until later.
I'm using how to combine to
refer to our rule by which we
combine our element,
by element, by element.
Here we're going to reduce 1,
2, 3 with our accumulate,
I'm gonna call it buildingUp, our value
of buildingUp which is gonna be 0.
So, we're gonna combine 0 and 1 how?
Virginia, can you spot how
we're gonna combine 0 and 1?
>> Virginia: Sorry what?
>> Will Sentance: How we're
gonna combine 0 and 1?
Can you spot Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: By adding.
>> Will Sentance: By adding.
That's gonna be our rule
by which we combine.
And then we're gonna use the outputs,
actually let's have a look at it,
I think we can sort of see it here right?
We're gonna take in buildingUp which is 0,
we're then gonna have our
how to combine rule which is add and it's
gonna combine 0 with array position 0.
Which will be the number what Jasmine?
>> Jasmine: 1.
>> Will Sentance: 1.
So going 0, 1, and
if you look at how add works, it takes
in (a and b) and returns out a + b.
So you're going to take in 0 and 1 return
out 1 and store that in buildingUp.
In other words we gonna take 0 and 1,
return out 1, and
store that in buildingUp.
And then you use that as the input,
there it is 1,
is gonna go into add with the next
value of the array which is a 2,
combine them to get 3,
store that in buildingUp.
Okay, all right.
Here we go people and
you're all ready to go.
Anna line one what are we doing?
>> Anna: Declaring the function reduce.
>> Will Sentance: Declaring
the function reduce.
There it is beautiful into memory,
into memory, there it is.
Thank you Anna.
Next line, let's not get confused by its
interesting syntax, what are we doing Sam?
>> Sam: Declaring add.
>> Will Sentance: Declaring
the function add.
And it's a very simple function.
It takes in an a and
a b and returns out a + b.
By the way, we always talk about wanting
to have semantic parameter names
meaningful to the reader.
There's an argument in functional
program to leave them a little bit more
general like this, so in order we can
use this function anywhere in our code,
doesn't have to be specific
to what data we're adding.
So, and it's very readable, because it's a
short you need meaningful parameter names
when you got like 30 parameters and
15 lines of code in the function.
Also necessary when it's as simple and
short as this.
Okay, excellent, there it is saved,
hopefully not too small,
everyone can see it.
Charles, left-hand side here,
what are we doing?
>> Charles: You're declaring
a variable called sum.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, excellent, and you
know what people I'm gonna use this moment
to do my other type of diagram
over here to help ourselves out.
So we're gonna call reduce on 1,
2, 3, add and 0.
What's it gonna do?
It's gonna take in 1, 2, 3,
>> Will Sentance: Okay,
it's gonna take in 1, 2, 3,
it's going to take in our buildingUp,
our thing with which
we're going to combine.
We did it with an array, which honestly,
except for Sam, and real credit to Sam I
don't say this ironically, literally it
is remarkable if your mind is able to go,
when I'm doing map what I'm really
doing is reducing a list of data.
Well, not a list, a first element
with an array to get an array with
that element in,
one array with that element doubled,
and then taking that and taking the two
and combining it to get 2 and 4.
And then taking the 2 and 4 and
combining it with a 3 to get 2, 4, 6,
that's a really big shift.
So there it is our 1 and 0,
how are we combining these?
Michael, can you spot how
we're combining them?
>> Michael: We're adding them.
>> Will Sentance: We're adding,
we're running an add function on them.
So we're gonna take in the first one and
it's gonna give us out
1 plus 0 which is 1.
And then that's going to
go into our next adding,
or our next combining,
and it's gonna return
out 1 plus 2 which is what everybody?
>> Michael: 3.
>> Will Sentance: Geez.
And then we're taking that one and
taking in the building all the way our
buildingUp's being updated, this is
gonna be our buildingUp, buildingUp.
And we're taking it in again, and
this time with a final element of the,
final element of
the [INAUDIBLE] which is 3,
inserting into how to
combine which is everybody?
What is our how to combine rule?
It is?
>> Michael: Add.
>> Will Sentance: Add, and
it's gonna give us out 6, there it is.
This,
>> Will Sentance: People, is our
accumulator which I'm calling buildingUp,
what we're building up as we go.
>> Will Sentance: And this here people
is our rule for how to combine,
they call it the rule for a reducing,
how to combine reducing from 2 to 1.
All right people now let's
get running our function.
There it is summed,
we don't know where to store it yet
because we've got to go off and
run reduce.
Our beautiful reduce function
the most powerful versatile of all.
I wanna tell you now but I can't.
I gotta do the big reveal.
I wanna tell you now about just imagine
if what you could store in this list
here that you could then
combine with here, element and
then use the output from 2 becomes 1,
combine the next from 2 becomes 1,
just imagine what you could store in here.
Don't anyone shout out.
All right, good summed uninitialized for
now while we go and
run,
>> Will Sentance: Reduce with
the input of what?
Who I'm gonna call on?
Eric?
>> Eric: So we have an array with 1,
2, 3 in it.
>> Will Sentance: Yep.
>> Eric: We had the function add-
>> Will Sentance: Perfect.
>> Eric: And then we have the number 0.
>> Will Sentance: Fantastic,
I don't know why I'm doing the full
function adds code there, but whatever.
There it is, that's pretty unhelpful.
Why did I do that?
And then 0, okay.
And we're gonna create,
everybody together, a new?
>> Virginia: Execution context.
>> Will Sentance: Welcome.
Good.
>> Virginia: [LAUGH].
>> Will Sentance: Seth!
Seth got to cut short because
he's been to hard parts before.
You're so confident.
>> Virginia: [LAUGH].
>> Will Sentance: And its output when it
does eventually give us a return value
will be stored in summed.
Let's create the execution context,
I'm gonna do a big old execution
context here people, there it is.
>> Will Sentance: Look
at that how careful,
I do see it's always at this angle,
I have clearly very bad spatial awareness.
There it is, and
into the local memory or into the local
execution context we go and
what is in our local memory first?
What is the first thing in
our local memory Babanesh?
>> Babanesh: 1, 2, 3.
>> Will Sentance: Array is set to 1, 2, 3.
Next thing Babanesh is our label how to
combine is assigned what functionality?
Babanesh?
>> Babanesh: Add.
>> Will Sentance: The add functionality.
Meaning anywhere people that
you now see how to combine
inside of reduce it's actually saying add.
And therefore,
we're gonna pass into a and b buildingUp,
which looks like it's gonna be 0,
that's good.
And the first position of the array,
which is 1, and
combine them up by adding
to get the number 1.
I'm happy with that.
All right, in goes a and b and
our function is gonna return out a + b.
Final thing, the thing with which
we're going to combine, by the way,
I'm going to tell you right now, I wish
this function were not called reduced but
called reduce from two things
to one repeatedly inside itself.
Another catchy name!
>> Babanesh: Rolls off the tongue.
>> Will Sentance: Rolls off the tongue.
But otherwise, you're so tempted to think
the reduction is from here to here.
The reduction is from that first element
with the 0 combined to produce 1 through
our rule of combining
which is adding the two.
And then taking the output of that,
have I said this enough times now?
[LAUGH] Good.
I would always rather
say it too many times,
and you're all feeling uh-huh, yeah, yeah,
yeah too simple than the other way around.
All right, and
then the final parameter Babanesh is?
>> Babanesh: BuildingUp.
>> Will Sentance: BuildingUp
which is given what value?
Given what value Babanesh?
>> Babanesh: 1 plus-
>> Will Sentance: No, no,
the buildingUp is?
>> Babanesh: 0.
>> Will Sentance: Is given in 0, exactly.
Okay, there it is, folk.
We land in reduce and
the first thing we do is a for loop.
David i's value at the start of the for
loop is what?
>> David: 0.
>> Will Sentance: 0.
Okay, array positions 0 is what, David?
>> David: 1.
>> Will Sentance: 1, redemption.
BuildingUp David so we got our 1,
buildingUp we're gonna combined
our 1 with what David?
>> David: With buildingUp to 0-
>> Will Sentance: Which is 0, excellent.
And we are gonna combine
them using what rule,
our how to combine which is what David?
>> David: The add function.
>> Will Sentance: It's add function,
exactly.
We take 0 and 1 in and we return out 1.
And we store it where, David?
>> David: In buildingUp.
>> Will Sentance: Into buildingUp,
exactly.
We update our value of buildingUp to 1.
That is to say it gets stored
into buildingUp which is now 1.
There it is 1,
we've reduced from 2 to become 1.
And now we're gonna use that output of the
first reducing 2 to become 1 to combine
could reduce with the next element of
the array to hopefully get one thing out.
And so
we're going to say now i's value Anna is?
>> Anna: 1.
>> Will Sentance: Not 0 is 1,
excellent Anna.
Is 1, Anna's spot on.
I's value is 1 therefore array position 1
is our next element which is what Anna?
>> Anna: 2.
>> Will Sentance: 2, excellent.
And our 2 is combined with
buildingUp which now is no longer 0,
it's been updated by our combining with
the first element to be what Anna?
>> Anna: 1.
>> Will Sentance: 1, well done from Anna.
1 and
2 are gonna be combined by what rule Anna?
>> Anna: Add.
>> Will Sentance: Add
is our how to combine.
Outcomes 3, and
we're gonna do what with that, Anna?
>> Anna: Store it in buildingUp.
>> Will Sentance: Into buildingUp,
she's spot on,
into buildingUp which is now gonna be 3,
there it is.
Whew, and now i's final value is 2.
Therefore, array position 2 Alex, is?
>> Alex: 3.
>> Will Sentance: 3, and we wanna combine
it with the output of the previous
combination which we stored in buildingUp.
And so we do 3 and that 3 and
combine them Alex by what rule?
>> Alex: Add.
>> Will Sentance: Add.
It returns out 6 which gets stored into
what dates the value of what Alex?
>> Alex: BuildingUp.
>> Will Sentance: BuildingUp.
And the final line of the reduction
function, the function, well,
let's not call it that of
our reduced functionality.
Our function that does repeat it
reduction from 2 to become 1 and
then takes that and reduces it with
an x value to become 1 and takes that.
The final output is our value
buildingUp which is what Alex?
>> Alex: 6.
>> Will Sentance: Is 6.
And we return that out into what Alex?
>> Alex: Summed.
>> Will Sentance: Into summed.
And there it is people.
That is the heart of
the most important function
that we use in functional programming,
reduce.
It is not about reducing 1, 2, 3 to 6,
it is about reducing 1 with 0 through
some rule and then taking the output of
that reduction and inserting into the rule
again with an x value and reducing it
from 2 to become 1, 2 to become 1.
And here's the thing people
we can reduce with anything.
We can reduce our values with an array,
which now 1, suppose our
reduction rule where instead with an array
our reduction rule would be 1 and
then multiply it by 2 and push it into
the array, and we'd get 2 in an array.
And then we'd take that one with the 2
multiply it by 2 combine it with
the 2 array,
the array with 2 in and get 2, 4.
And then the 2, well let's write it,
we'd combine to get, so
we take an array combine it by multiplying
the element and pushing it in and get 2.
And then take the next one double
push it in and get 2, 4 and
take the next one with the 3 doubled,
push it in and get 2, 4, 6.
And our rule for how to combine here would
be multiply element by 2 and push 2 array.
And the things we'd take
in would be our element and
our array which updates each time.
Wow, what a versatile function this is.
What a flexible function this is.
All right, but do you see why I
think it should be called reduce by,
it [INAUDIBLE] be to reduced.
Reduced from two things to one
repeatedly inside the function,
because it's not reducing 1, 2,
3 to 6 which you might think,
cuz you can also reduce 1,
2, 3, to 2, 4, 6.
It's the reduction from
element with accumulator, and
that's what our buildingUp
is called officially.
And our how to a combine rule is
called our reducer, our function,
our rule for how we reduce from 2 to 1.
I'm repeating it cuz it seems to easy,
hm, better that then.
Another thing I want you to know
before we move onto further material.
And that is arrays, objects and functions
have access to something known as methods.
I just wanna stress,
that's what I wanted say,
right now reducing data with more data.
>> Will Sentance: Imagine if we could
reduce something element by element
repeatedly inside of reduce.
Inside reduce, imagine we could reduce
something that was not data but
instead something else, not a list of
data but a list of something else.
That would change everything
about how we write code.